Action 	
 	Traditionally (but no longer exclusively) aimed at male readers, features physical action and violence, usually around a quest or mission set in exotic locations such as deserts, jungles, or mountains. Stories often include elements of technology, weapons, and other hardware. The genre is still largely aimed towards males (for example, the James Bond series is often categorized as action), but many later works feature women in roles more traditionally reserved for males, such as heroic bodyguards.
Adventure 	
 	Books whose characters undergo some kind of quest or task to accomplish a goal, often a journey, and usually dangerous.
Alternate History 	
 	Discussion of what might have been, given different decisions and actions at key points in history -- if Hitler had won WWII, or if Hitler hadn't ever come to power, for example.
Androids, Cyborgs & Robots 	
 	Stories in which the main story, a major sub-theme, or one (or more) of the central characters, involves cybernetic limb replacement, anthropomorphic (i.e., human-like) androids, or autonomous robots.
Angels & Demons 	
 	Stories that involve immortal spirits interacting with mortals, and possibly even assuming physical form. Usually, but not always, involves a religious theme, or morality play. Also included here are lesser spirits given mortally created form, such as enchanted constructs (golems), incubated homunculi, and other types of magical mortal familiars inhabited by immortal spirits.
Animal 	
 	Books which have animals as the main characters, or whose plots revolve around animals. For example, the Redwall series by Brian Jacques.
Arthurian Legends 	
 	Stories relating in some way to the mythology surrounding King Arthur and his Knights of the Round Table. May be historical, may be fantasy (or neither), but has Arthur as a central theme.
Artificial Intelligence 	
 	Stories in which the main story, a major sub-theme, or one (or more) of the central characters, involves or explores the role and/or nature of computer intelligence. Examples: 2001 (HAL), Number of the Beast (Gay Deceiver), etc.
Autobiography/ Memoirs 	
 	Non-Fiction books about the lives of the author that wrote them.
Avante Garde & Surreal 	
 	Books having a deliberately non-traditional experimental story structure, and/or highly unusual or surreal writing style.
Biographical 	
 	Nonfiction books about the lives of real people.
Business 	
 	
Childrens 	
 	Books intended either to be read to children, or to be read by children who are still learning to read well, up to perhaps age 8 or so.
Christmas 	
 	Works about the traditional Christian holy day.
Classic 	
 	Books that are recognizable by a typical high-school grad, whether they've read them or not. Examples include War & Peace, Great Expectations, Of Mice & Men, The Pearl.
Coming of Age 	
 	Works that have an emphasis on the journey from youth to adulthood.
Computers 	
 	Books about computer software packages, computer hardware, computer languages and operating systems, various computer applications, the internet, and stories about same.
Contemporary 	
 	The setting is in the modern world, filled with the hustle and bustle of our everyday lives.
Crime & Prison 	
 	Books in which the primary focus involves crime, criminals, gangs, the mafia, etc.
Criticism & Commentary 	
 	A book whose main purpose is to interpret, analyze, or otherwise opine about the work of another author, real life events (past, present or projected), a body of thought, a belief system, etc
Death, Dying and Grieving 	
 	Literature which explores the process of death, dying, and grieving from the perspective of the person experiencing it and/or the perspective of those close to him/her.
Decision Tree 	
 	Includes those "Choose Your Own Adventure" books you may remember. The reader chooses which parts of the book to read to form a story based on the decisions they make for the characters.
Economics 	
 	
Educational, Instructional, Reference 	
 	Books that focus on educating/instructing the reader on a particular subject (i.e., how-to books), or which are intended to serve as an information reference (i.e., encyclopedias, dictionaries, charts & tables, etc).
Epic Saga 	
 	A book, or often series of books, with far-reaching storylines that involve an entire region or world (or more). Usually, characters in such sagas have great effect on their surroundings. The books or series themselves tend to be long, and often dense reading.
Erotic 	
 	Stories in which sex and/or sensuality play a major role. Not necessarily romance, as love is not always included. Often for mature audiences only.
Espionage 	
 	Books in which the primary focus involves spying and spycraft, of any flavor (military, corporate, international, etc.)
Ethics and Morality 	
 	Books that deal with Ethics (the discipline dealing with what is good and bad) or Morality (referring to a code of conduct put forward by a society or, some other group, such as a religion, or accepted by an individual for their own behaviour or given specified conditions, would be put forward by all rational persons. ) or have those as major themes.
Ethnic: Native American 	
 	Works which come from the history and legends of Native Americans, and works that explain and expound upon the same, as well as work written by Native Americans.
Fairy Tales 	
 	Books which deal heavily with well-known children's wonder tales such as Cinderella, Snow White, etc. Also includes stories which feature fairies, faeries, and fae as primary characters or plot devices.
Family Life 	
 	Best described by Plato in 'The Republic" --- We have been long expecting that you would tell us something about the family life of your citizens--how they will bring children into the world, and rear them when they have arrived, and, in general, what is the nature of this community of women and children-for we are of opinion that the right or wrong management of such matters will have a great and paramount influence on the State for good or for evil.
Fantasy 	
 	Speculative fiction that relies on magic and/or mythology for its differences from "reality."
Feminism 	
 	Books discussing themes to do with the self-liberation of women from gender based limitations, feminism or femininity in general, or books (fictional or biographical) focusing exclusively on strong female main character(s) and/or matriachal societies.
Fiction (General) 	
 	Fictional stories can be based on actual people or events or be based entirely on the author's imagination, but all fictional stories contain elements that are made-up or created by the author.
Film & Television 	
 	Books pertaining to the Film and Television entertainment industry. Works may include history of the medium, commentary, textbooks, episode guides, collectibles, trivia, movie storybooks and related published film tie-ins. Not to be confused with the "Novelizations" genre, which involves adaptations of stories from these media into novel form, rather than the reverse.
Fine Arts 	
 	Books in which the primary focus involves one (or more) branches of the visual or performing arts: Drawing & Painting, Photography, Sculpture, Fashion, Opera, Concert Pianist, Violinist etc.
Folklore & Mythology 	
 	Books that are primarily a re-telling, collection, or analysis of the beliefs of previous or current cultures. These beliefs may be termed religion by their believers, but are often interpreted by others as allegories and wonder tales.
Food & Wine 	
 	Books in which the primary focus involves food and/or beverages. Includes (variously) cookbooks, tell alls & (auto)biographies by people in the industry, restaurant reviews & guides, ingredient and technique guides, books on making & appreciating various beverages (alcoholic or otherwise), etc.
Freemasonry 	
 	Literature by, and about, the ancient fraternal order of Free and Accepted Masons.
Games & Entertainment 	
 	Books intended to provide or enhance rules for game-playing, often role-playing games such as Dungeons & Dragons.
Genealogy 	
 	Books whose primary subject matter involves the exploration/documentation of family trees and family history.
GENRE NEEDED 	
 	We can use this to flag books that are awaiting the addition of a new genre.
Ghosts 	
 	Stories that involve the restless non-corporeal spirits of former mortals. Usually, but not always, a sub-genre under horror.
Graphic Novel 	
 	A novel whose narrative is related through a combination of text and art, often in western style comic-strip form. Includes many superhero works, such as Superman and X-men.
Health, Fitness, Medical & Nutrition 	
 	Books about healthy living, fitness and exercise, nutrition, consumer advice regarding medical conditions, etc.
Hi-Tech 	
 	Tales in which technology is a major focus -- whether as a goal, a tool, a weapon, or something else. Often, but not always, science fiction.
Historical 	
 	Stories that take place in the past. Usually the plots are things that could actually have happened and are sometimes based on true events.
Horror 	
 	Stories which intend to frighten the reader, whether with monsters (Frankenstein, Stephen King's It), psychological terrors (much of V.C. Andrews' work) or other methods.
Humour & Satire 	
 	Tales with the intent to make you laugh, or at least smile. May be sardonic observations of reality or stories of amusing fictional characters or events, among other types.
Inspirational, Therapeutic & Self Help 	
 	Books that teach us ways to improve ourselves. From learning how to cope with chronic illness to showing how others have overcome the same obstacles we face, these books provide us with the know-how to live healthier and less stressful lives.
Juvenile 	
 	Books intended for those who are young (or young-at-heart) but no longer exactly children. Between the ages of 6 and 12. These are the first chapter books, like Little House on the Prairie and The Black Stallion. These deal with issues that kids between the ages of 6-12 deal with--friends, school, family relationships, etc. There is generally no sexual content at all in these books, and the violence is usually minimal--and not developed with detail if it is there.
Legal 	
 	Books in which the interpretation and application of a society's laws play a major role. Includes courtroom fiction such as John Grisham's works, as well as books that focus on law enforcement officers and procedures of all sorts.
Magical Realism 	
 	Books written in a realistic world on earth, while incorporating magical elements as reality. Tell-tale characteristics include a non-linear approach to time (often cyclical), non-linear plots (eg. parallel plots in different layers of time overlapping), rich symbolism and imagery, incorporation of mythology and folklore, and non-realistic events happening in a realistic setting.
Manga 	
 	Japanese style volumised graphic novels often possessing a linear storyline that extends to several volumes. Includes works such as Inuyasha, Naruto and Love Hina.
Martial Arts 	
 	Books in which the primary focus involves the martial arts and/or martial artists.
Mathematics 	
 	Non-Fiction or fiction where the plot deals HEAVILY with mathematics in a central fashion.
Mature 	
 	Books that, for reasons usually of sexual or violent content or themes requiring more experience to interpret, would usually be deemed appropriate for adults only. [But not specifically erotic]
Medical (Fiction) 	
 	Stories that use current or near-future medical theories and practices as a basis. May include themes such as virus outbreaks, genetic engineering, etc.
Medical (Non-Fiction) 	
 	Books that use current or past medical science or themes as a basis. May include memoirs, textbooks, reference books, real life historical accounts, past and present medical research, etc.
Mystery 	
 	Books about the solving of a particular crime, generally a murder, or other large crime.
Nanotechnology 	
 	Stories involving microscopic machines.
Nature & Ecology 	
 	Books that focus on the natural world. Includes novels in which a natural setting plays a major part, non-fiction books that analyze ecological cycles, works which focus on man's effect on the environment, and other similar topics.
Nautical 	
 	Stories set primarily on or around sea- and ocean-faring ships.
Non-Fiction 	
 	Now Why have I included a Genre of Non-Fiction in a database of Fiction? It is because there are many authors who have written a lot of Fiction and some non-fiction...
Novelisations 	
 	Books that are based on stories that have already been presented in other forms of media such as, but not limited to; movies, television shows, radio programs, and videogames.
Philosophy 	
 	Works that represent attempts to understand the "greater truths" or humanity -- why are we here? what is good, and what is evil? -- through analysis rather than through speculation.
Poetry 	
 	Books in which the primary focus is on the beauty of the written word, in all it's varied splendors
Politics 	
 	Books in which the primary focus involves politicians, the political process in general, major political incidents, political commentary, etc.
Post-Apocalypse 	
 	Speculative fiction of what might happen were our world to undergo cataclysmic change, along the lines of nuclear annihlation, another ice age, etc. Often a subsection of science fiction, but not always.
Private Investigator 	
 	
Psionic Powers 	
 	Books that have as a focus extraordinary powers of the human mind such as telekinesis, telepathy, and mind control.
Psychology & Counseling 	
 	
Psychometrics & Cognition 	
 	Books in which the primary focus involves studying and/or discussing matters pertaining to human reasoning and intelligence, typically with special emphasis on testing and statistical analysis in order to identify and/or examine those who lie outside the range of what is considered "normal". Related topics may include the unique problems and experiences of such people (i.e., those who are 'challenged' or 'gifted'), from a psychological, social or behavioral standpoint.
Religion 	
 	Books that have as a focus or strong base one or more of the world's major religions. May be non-fiction accounts and interpretations of the religion(s), or fiction that relies on an understanding of them.
Romance 	
 	The trials, tribulations and triumphs of falling in love. Always has a happy ending, but not necessarily marriage.
Science 	
 	Books that discuss current or past scientific advances, theories, and practices.
Science Fiction 	
 	Fiction that relies on advanced technology and/or an expanded definition of current laws of science for its differences from regular fiction. Some people use the alternate term "Speculative Fiction" which poses fictional "what if" circumstances, and then explores {read: speculates} about the ramifications of those hypothetical circumstances. Those adhering to the latter usage sometimes consider "Science Fiction" (aka 'SciFi") to be a sub-genre of 'SpecFi' with more of a 'hard science' bent. At the present time, we use the terms interchangeably.
Setting: Battletech 	
 	Armored combat action fiction set in the Battletech/Mechwarrior role-playing game campaign setting, by Roc publishing.
Setting: Buffy the Vampire Slayer 	
 	Fiction set in the world of Buffy, or books discussing that world.
Setting: Dark Sun - Athas 	
 	Fiction set in the "Dark Sun" campaign setting of the D20/AD&D Role Playing Game universe
Setting: Dr. Who 	
 	Fiction set in the world of Dr Who, or books discussing that world.
Setting: Dragonlance 	
 	Books set in either the world of "Krynn" (by Margaret Weiss and Tracy Hickmann), or in the "Dragonlance" campaign setting (which is based on Krynn) of the D20/AD&D Role Playing Game universe
Setting: Eternal Champion 	
 	Fiction set in the worlds of Michael Moorcock's Eternal Champion, or books discussing those worlds.
Setting: Forgotten Realms 	
 	Books set in the Forgotten Realms campaign setting for Dungeons & Dragons.
Setting: Greyhawk 	
 	Fiction set in the world of Grayhawk, or books discussing this world.
Setting: Magic, The Gathering 	
 	Books about, or set in, the "Magic: The GatheringTM" collectible card game.
Setting: Middle Earth 	
 	Material set in J. R. R. Tolkien's "Middle Earth" or in the Middle Earth Role Playing Game campaign setting (aka "MERP").
Setting: Planescape 	
 	Fiction set in the "Planescape" multi-verse fantasy campaign setting of the D20/AD&D Role Playing Game universe
Setting: Ravenloft 	
 	Books set in the "Ravenloft" (vampires, werewolves & gothic horror) campaign setting of the D20/AD&D Role Playing Game universe.
Setting: Star Trek 	
 	Fiction set in the world of Gene Roddenberry's Star Trek, or books discussing that world.
Setting: Star Wars 	
 	Fiction set in the world of George Lucas' Star Wars, or books discussing that world.
Setting: Thieves' World 	
 	Stories and books set in Robert Lynn Asprin's fantasy world of the same name.
Setting: Vampire The Masquerade 	
 	Vampire-related fiction set in the "Vampire the Masquerade" role-playing game campaign setting, by White Wolf Publishing.
Setting: Velgarth 	
 	Stories and books set in Mercedes Lackey's fantasy world of Velgarth, including Valdemar, Karse, the Tayledras & the Shin'a'in, among other areas and races.
Short Stories 	
 	Books that include multiple stories (plural) of less than novel length ...
Sport 	
 	Non-fiction books about real-world sporting events, games, and figures, or fiction in which the world of sports plays a heavy role.
Supernatural 	
 	A "catchall" genre for supernatural activity. May include topics also contained in other genres eg Vampires. Also contains such paranormal activity as Psi powers. Unless some other supernatural element is involved (eg Psi Powers) should not be used purely if there are ET elements.
Suspense 	
 	A grittier, more stressful, and more complex form of mystery, often with multiple crimes and a larger number of people affected, and emotional ambience taking precedence over logic and reason. Here, it's not just about solving a puzzle or crime ... in fact, the protagonist might even be on the run from the antagonist, rather than the other way around.
Theatrical 	
 	Stories in the form of dramatic plays or screenplays. May also include books which feature the world of theatre as a main focus.
Thriller 	
 	Tough, resourceful, but usually ordinary 'heroes' are pitted against the baddest of the bad, who are determined to destroy them, their country, or the entire world. High stakes, non-stop action, plot twists, exotic settings, and an intense pace until the adrenaline packed climax are found throughout these books. The plot of a thriller is usually driven by the villain, who presents obstacles that the hero must overcome.
Time Travel 	
 	Books, often science fiction, which include and focus on travel through time, be it to the past or farther into the future than the normal passage of time allows.
Travel & Tourism 	
 	Books which provide information on traveling to specific locales, and things to look for while you're there.
Undead 	
 	Stories that feature lesser forms of undead, such as Zombies or Mummies - mortals that bodily return to some incomplete stage of life or animation, either as the result of science run amok (robocop, frankenstein), a virus (resident evil), magic (mummies), or evil so great that it transcends death (revenants/liches like Freddy Kruger and Jason). A common theme in these stories is that something is missing that the undead is driven to recover - either some vital spark that was lost, a curse or some undying hatred, or perhaps cannibalistic needs. Often, but not always, a sub-genre under horror. Note that vampires are a related but seperate genre.
Vampire 	
 	Stories which feature vampires -- blood-drinking creatures of the night, typically -- as major themes or characters. The vampire(s) in question may be heroes or villains, or both! The cause of the vampirism could be an undead or magical curse (Dracula), a virus (Underworld), or genetic mutation (Blade). Often, but not always, a sub-genre under horror.
Virtual Reality 	
 	Books which employ a world of computers that is separate from ours, but emulate it in some way. Typically science fiction, although there may be cases where our current technology approaches virtual reality, as well.
War 	
 	Books that discuss and analyze factual wars, or the theories behind the same, or books that focus on events and figures during fictional military engagements.
Werewolves & Shapeshifters 	
 	Stories which feature weres -- werewolves, typically but occasionally other breeds of were -- as major themes or characters. The were(s) in question may be heroes or villains, or both! The cause of the were could be an undead or magical curse, a virus, or genetic mutation. Often, but not always, a sub-genre under horror.
Western 	
 	Stories set in America's "Old West," a time of cowboys, indians, frontier living, and shootouts with the sheriff or marshal.
Young Adult 	
 	Books for the adolescent reader, i.e., between the ages of 12 and 18. These deal with the more serious issues faced by kids in their teens--they are significantly more raw--sexual content (though not containing, usually, the heavy "heaving bosom, masculine ,...uh...love muscle" descriptors. These books contain issues like teen pregnancy, dating violence, parental abuse, horror lite, and general "life experiences" that are common to the adolescent.